aws_ec2 doc guide (#904)
ansible-collections/amazon.aws: docs/docsite/rst/aws_ec2_guide.rst

.. _ansible_collections.amazon.aws.docsite.dynamic_inventory:

Dynamic Inventory Plugin
========================

> ``aws_ec2`` dynamic inventory plugin allow users to point at data sources to compile the inventory of AWS EC2 hosts that Ansible uses to target tasks, either via the ``-i /path/to/file`` and/or ``-i 'host1, host2'`` command line parameters or from other configuration sources.

Reviewer: Something feels off about this, it's halfway between explaining what a dynamic inventory does, and what the AWS EC2 plugin does, but doesn't quite do either.

I'd probably lean towards this first paragraph explaining what a dynamic inventory plugin *generally* does, and slightly tweaking the paragraph below below to explain specifically what the AWS EC2 plugin does: talk to the AWS APIs to pull a list of EC2 instances.

Author: @tremble Tried to improve the doc. Let me know if there's something else to improve.

Once your AWS EC2 hosts are spun up, you'll probably want to talk to them again. With a cloud setup, it's best to not maintain a static list of cloud hostnames
in text files. Rather, the best way to handle this is to use the ``aws_ec2`` dynamic inventory plugin.

The plugin will also return instances that were created outside of Ansible and allow Ansible to manage them.

.. _ansible_collections.amazon.aws.docsite.using_inventory_plugin:

Minimal Example
===============

To start using the ``aws_ec2`` dynamic inventory plugin with a YAML configuration source, create a file with the accepted filename schema documented for the plugin in question (a YAML configuration file that ends with aws_ec2.(yml|yaml), e.g., demo.aws_ec2.yml), then add ``plugin: amazon.aws.aws_ec2``. Use the fully qualified name if the plugin is in a collection.

Fetch all hosts in us-east-1, the hostname is the public DNS if it exists, otherwise the private IP address.

.. code-block:: yaml

    # demo.aws_ec2.yml
    plugin: amazon.aws.aws_ec2

>     # If your Ansible server is running inside the AWS environment, attach an EC2 instance role with the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    # If your Ansible controller is running inside the AWS environment, attach an EC2 instance role with the
```

It's probably worth calling out that the inventory plugins are run on the controller.  This has a significant effect on the python environment in use, and has caused confusion in the past.

    # required AWS EC2 permissions. This way you don't have to add the access and secret key in the
    # configuration. Ansible will automatically use the attached role to make the AWS API calls.
    iam_role_arn: arn:aws:iam::1234567890:role/assumed-ansible

    # If your Ansible server is not in the AWS then you can not attach IAM role to it so instead
    # of that you set `aws_access_key` and `aws_secret_key`.
    aws_access_key: <YOUR-AWS-ACCESS-KEY-HERE>
    aws_secret_key: <YOUR-AWS-SECRET-KEY-HERE>

    # Or attach the default AWS profile
    aws_profile: default

    # Or you could use Jinja2 to attach the AWS profile from the environment variable.

>     aws_profile: "{{ lookup('env', 'AWS_PROFILE') | default('dev-profile', true) }}"

Reviewer: Authentication generally wants to be an "a xor b xor c".  As such I'd be tempted to split it out to specifically talk about authentication pieces.

    # This sets the region. If empty (the default) default this will include all regions, except possibly
    # restricted ones like us-gov-west-1 and cn-north-1.
    regions:
    - us-east-1

After providing any required options, you can view the populated inventory with ``ansible-inventory -i demo.aws_ec2.yml --graph``:

.. code-block:: text

   @all:
    |--@aws_ec2:
    |  |--ip-10-210-0-189.ec2.internal
    |  |--ip-10-210-0-195.ec2.internal
    |--@ungrouped:

Allowed Options
===============

> Some of the ``aws_ec2`` dynamic inventory plugin are explained in detailed in the next (see `full list of allowed options <https://docs.ansible.com/ansible/latest/collections/amazon/aws/aws_ec2_inventory.html#id3>`_).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Some of the ``aws_ec2`` dynamic inventory plugin are explained in detailed below.  For a full list see `the plugin documentation <https://docs.ansible.com/ansible/latest/collections/amazon/aws/aws_ec2_inventory.html#id3>`_.
```

      prefix: 'security_groups'
    
    # This creates a host group for each value of the Application tag.
    - key: tags.Application
      separator: ''

    # This creates a host group per region e.g., `aws_region_us_east_2`.
    - key: placement.region
      prefix: aws_region

    # This creates host groups based on the value of a custom tag `Role` and add them to a metagroup called `project`.
    - key: tags['Role']
      prefix: foo
      parent_group: "project"
    
    # This creates a common parent group for all EC2 availability zones.
    - key: placement.availability_zone
      parent_group: all_ec2_zones
    
    # This creates a group per distro (distro_CentOS, distro_Debian) and assigns the hosts that have matching values to it,
    # using the default separator "_".
    - prefix: distro
      key: ansible_distribution

``groups``
----------

It is also possible to create groups using ``groups`` option.

Some examples are shown below:

.. code-block:: yaml

  groups:
    # This created two groups - `redhat` and `ubuntu` based on tags
    # These conditionals are expressed using Jinja2 syntax.
    redhat: "'redhat' in tags.OS"

>     ubuntu: "'ubuntu' in tags.OS"

Reviewer: While we're talking about tags, OS is also information available (theoretically) via the AMIs, there's a risk someone would think of OS as automatically added.    Something like Environment: Production/Preproduction might be a better example

    # This created a libvpc group based on specific condition on `vpc_id`.
    libvpc: vpc_id == 'vpc-####'

``compose``
-----------

``compose`` creates and modifies host variables from Jinja2 expressions.

.. code-block:: yaml

  compose:
    # This sets the ansible_host variable to connect with the private IP address without changing the hostname.
    ansible_host: private_ip_address

>     # This sets location_vars variable.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    # This sets location_vars variable as a dictionary with location as a key
```

    location_vars:

>       location: "east_coast"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      location: "east_coast"
```
If we have region available to us, it might be good to set a second key to show that location_vars is a dict rather than something magic.

.. _ansible_collections.amazon.aws.docsite.dynamic_inventory:

Dynamic Inventory Plugin
========================

> A dynamic inventory plugin allow users to point at data sources to compile the inventory of hosts that Ansible uses to target tasks, either via the ``-i /path/to/file`` and/or ``-i 'host1, host2'`` command line parameters or from other configuration sources.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A dynamic inventory plugin allows users to point at data sources to compile the inventory of hosts that Ansible uses to target tasks, either via the ``-i /path/to/file`` and/or ``-i 'host1, host2'`` command line parameters or from other configuration sources.
```

When using Ansible with AWS, inventory file maintenance will be a hectic task as AWS frequently changes IPs, autoscaling instances, and more.
Once your AWS EC2 hosts are spun up, you'll probably want to talk to them again.

> With a cloud setup, it's best to not maintain a static list of cloud hostnames in text files.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
With a cloud setup, it's best not to maintain a static list of cloud hostnames in text files.
```

Rather, the best way to handle this is to use the ``aws_ec2`` dynamic inventory plugin.

The ``aws_ec2`` dynamic inventory plugin makes API calls to AWS to get a list of inventory hosts from Amazon Web Services EC2 in the run time.
It gives the EC2 instance details dynamically to manage the AWS infrastructure.

The plugin will also return instances that were created outside of Ansible and allow Ansible to manage them.

To start using the ``aws_ec2`` dynamic inventory plugin with a YAML configuration source, create a file with the accepted filename schema documented for the plugin in question (a YAML configuration file that ends with aws_ec2.(yml|yaml), e.g., demo.aws_ec2.yml), then add ``plugin: amazon.aws.aws_ec2``. Use the fully qualified name if the plugin is in a collection.

.. _ansible_collections.amazon.aws.docsite.using_inventory_plugin:

Authentication
==============

> If your Ansible controller is not in the AWS, authentication with is handled by either

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If your Ansible controller is not in AWS, authentication is handled by either
```

specifying your access and secret key as ENV variables or inventory plugin arguments. 

For environment variables:

.. code-block:: bash

    export AWS_ACCESS_KEY_ID='AK123'
    export AWS_SECRET_ACCESS_KEY='abc123'

> The ``AWS_SECURITY_TOKEN`` environment variable can also be used, but is only supported for backward compatibility purposes.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The ``AWS_SECURITY_TOKEN`` environment variable can also be used but is only supported for backward compatibility.
```

> Or you can set ``aws_access_key`` and ``aws_secret_key`` and ``security_token`` inside the inventory configuration file.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Or you can set ``aws_access_key``, ``aws_secret_key``, and ``security_token`` inside the inventory configuration file.
```

Boto3 will automatically use IAM role credentials if it does not find credentials in any of the other places listed previously.
The shared credentials file has a default location of ``~/.aws/credentials``.

.. code-block:: yaml

    # demo.aws_ec2.yml
    plugin: amazon.aws.aws_ec2

    iam_role_arn: arn:aws:iam::1234567890:role/assumed-ansible

Minimal Example
===============

Fetch all hosts in us-east-1, the hostname is the public DNS if it exists, otherwise the private IP address.

.. code-block:: yaml

    # demo.aws_ec2.yml
    plugin: amazon.aws.aws_ec2

    # This sets the region. If empty (the default) default this will include all regions, except possibly
    # restricted ones like us-gov-west-1 and cn-north-1.
    regions:
    - us-east-1

After providing any required options, you can view the populated inventory with ``ansible-inventory -i demo.aws_ec2.yml --graph``:

.. code-block:: text

   @all:
    |--@aws_ec2:
    |  |--ip-10-210-0-189.ec2.internal
    |  |--ip-10-210-0-195.ec2.internal
    |--@ungrouped:

Allowed Options
===============

> Some of the ``aws_ec2`` dynamic inventory plugin are explained in detail below. For a full list see `the plugin documentation <https://docs.ansible.com/ansible/latest/collections/amazon/aws/aws_ec2_inventory.html#id3>`_.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Some of the ``aws_ec2`` dynamic inventory plugin options are explained in detail below. For a full list see `the plugin documentation <https://docs.ansible.com/ansible/latest/collections/amazon/aws/aws_ec2_inventory.html#id3>`_.
```

``hostnames``
-------------

``hostnames`` option provides different settings to choose how the hostname is going to be displayed.

Some examples are shown below:

.. code-block:: yaml

  hostnames:

>     # This option is going to allow to display the public ip addresses.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    # This option allows displaying the public ip addresses.
```

    - ip-address
  

>     # This option is going to allow to display the private ip addresses using `tag:Name` as a prefix.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    # This option allows displaying the private ip addresses using `tag:Name` as a prefix.
```

>     # `name` an be one of the options specified in http://docs.aws.amazon.com/cli/latest/reference/ec2/describe-instances.html#options.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    # `name` can be one of the options specified in http://docs.aws.amazon.com/cli/latest/reference/ec2/describe-instances.html#options.
```

    - name: 'private-ip-address'
      separator: '_'
      prefix: 'tag:Name'
    
    # Using literal values for hostname
    # # Hostname will be aws-test_literal
    - name: 'test_literal'
      separator: '-'       
      prefix: 'aws'
  
    # To use tags as hostnames use the syntax `tag:Name=Value` to use the hostname `Name_Value`, or
    # `tag:Name` to use the value of the Name tag. If value provided does not exist in the above options,
    # it will be used as a literal string.
    - name: 'tag:Tag1=Test1,Tag2=Test2'
    
    # Use dns-name attribute as hostname
    - dns-name

    # You can also specify a list in order of precedence for hostname variables.
    - ip-address
    - dns-name
    - tag:Name
    - private-ip-address
  

``keyed_groups``
----------------

You can create dynamic groups using host variables with the ``keyed_groups`` option. ``keyed_groups`` comes in a prefix and a key format.

> The prefix is going to be the name of the host group that is going to be concatenated with the key.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The prefix will be the name of the host group that is to be concatenated with the key.
```

      key: architecture
    
    # This creates host groups based on `x86_64` architecture.
    - prefix: arch
      key: architecture
      value:
          'x86_64'
    
    # This creates host groups based on availability zone.
    - prefix: az
      key: placement.availability_zone
    
    # If the EC2 tag Name had the value `redhat` the tag variable would be: `tag_Name_redhat`.
    # Similarly, if a tag existed for an AWS EC2 instance as `Applications` with the value of `nodejs` the  
    # variable would be: `tag_Applications_nodejs`.
    - prefix: tag
      key: tags
    
    # This creates host groups using instance_type, e.g., `instance_type_z3_tiny`.
    - prefix: instance_type
      key: instance_type

    # This creates host groups using security_groups id, e.g., `security_groups_sg_abcd1234` group for each security group.
    - key: 'security_groups|json_query("[].group_id")'
      prefix: 'security_groups'
    
    # This creates a host group for each value of the Application tag.
    - key: tags.Application
      separator: ''

    # This creates a host group per region e.g., `aws_region_us_east_2`.
    - key: placement.region
      prefix: aws_region

>     # This creates host groups based on the value of a custom tag `Role` and add them to a metagroup called `project`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    # This creates host groups based on the value of a custom tag `Role` and adds them to a metagroup called `project`.
```

    - key: tags['Role']
      prefix: foo
      parent_group: "project"
    
    # This creates a common parent group for all EC2 availability zones.
    - key: placement.availability_zone
      parent_group: all_ec2_zones
    
    # This creates a group per distro (distro_CentOS, distro_Debian) and assigns the hosts that have matching values to it,
    # using the default separator "_".
    - prefix: distro
      key: ansible_distribution

``groups``
----------

> It is also possible to create groups using ``groups`` option.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
It is also possible to create groups using the ``groups`` option.
```

    # These conditionals are expressed using Jinja2 syntax.
    redhat: "'Production' in tags.Environment"
    ubuntu: "'PreProduction' in tags.Environment"

    # This created a libvpc group based on specific condition on `vpc_id`.
    libvpc: vpc_id == 'vpc-####'

``compose``
-----------

``compose`` creates and modifies host variables from Jinja2 expressions.

.. code-block:: yaml

  compose:
    # This sets the ansible_host variable to connect with the private IP address without changing the hostname.
    ansible_host: private_ip_address

    # This sets location_vars variable as a dictionary with location as a key.
    location_vars:
      location: "east_coast"
      server_type: "ansible_hostname | regex_replace ('(.{6})(.{2}).*', '\\2')"
    
    # This sets location variable.
    location: "'east_coast'"

    # This lets you connect over SSM to the instance id.
    ansible_host: instance_id
    ansible_connection: 'community.aws.aws_ssm'

    # This defines combinations of host servers, IP addresses, and related SSH private keys.
    ansible_host: private_ip_address
    ansible_user: centos
    ansible_private_ssh_key_file: key_name

>     # This sets ec2_security_group_ids variable

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    # This sets the ec2_security_group_ids variable
```

    ec2_security_group_ids: security_groups | map(attribute='group_id') | list |  join(',')

``include_filters`` and ``exclude_filters``
-------------------------------------------

``include_filters`` and ``exclude_filters`` options give you the ability to compose the inventory with several queries (see `available filters <http://docs.aws.amazon.com/cli/latest/reference/ec2/describe-instances.html#options>`_).

.. code-block:: yaml

  include_filters:

>   # This includes in the inventory everything that has the following tags.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  # This includes everything in the inventory that has the following tags.
```

  - tag:Project:
      - 'planets'
  - tag:Environment:
      - 'demo'
  

>   # This excludes from the inventory everything that has the following tag:Name.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  # This excludes everything from the inventory that has the following tag:Name.
```

  exclude_filters:
  - tag:Name:
      - '{{ resource_prefix }}_3'

``filters``
-----------

``filters`` are used to filter out AWS EC2 instances based on conditions (see `available filters <http://docs.aws.amazon.com/cli/latest/reference/ec2/describe-instances.html#options>`_).

.. code-block:: yaml

  filters:
    # This selects only running instances with tag `Environment` tag set to `dev`.
    tag:Environment: dev
    instance-state-name : running

>     # This selects only instances with tag `Environment` tag set to `dev` and `qa` ans specific security group id.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    # This selects only instances with tag `Environment` tag set to `dev` and `qa` and specific security group id.
```

    tag:Environment:
      - dev
      - qa
    instance.group-id: sg-xxxxxxxx
   

>     # This selects only instances with tag `Name` fuflfilling specific conditions.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    # This selects only instances with tag `Name` fulfilling specific conditions.
```

>     # Thsi selects only instances with tag `Name` fuflfilling specific conditions.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    # This selects only instances with tag `Name` fuflfilling specific conditions.
```

    - tag:Name:
      - dev-*
      - share-resource
      - hotfix

``use_contrib_script_compatible_ec2_tag_keys`` and ``use_contrib_script_compatible_sanitization``
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

``use_contrib_script_compatible_ec2_tag_keys`` exposes the host tags with ec2_tag_TAGNAME keys like the old ec2.py inventory script when it's True.

By default the ``aws_ec2`` plugin is using a general group name sanitization to create safe and usable group names for use in Ansible.

> ``use_contrib_script_compatible_ec2_tag_keys`` allows you to override that, in efforts to allow migration from the old inventory script and matches the sanitization of groups when the script's replace_dash_in_groups option is set to False.

Reviewer 2: `replace_dash_in_groups` meant to be in backticks?
